---
title: More otters are killed on roads every year.
image: "/media/072_610.JPG"
published: true
date: 2016-05-03
category: news
layout: news
---
Traffic kills more and more otters every year. About 50 dead otters are
found every year on Czech roads and the number is continuously
increasing. The reason is the increase in intensity of road traffic as
well as barrier effect of roads that, when crossing a river or stream,
do not provide safe underpass or overpass that could be used by otters.
The new map application [www.vydrynasilnici.cz][1] launched by ALKA
Wildlife aims at changing this situation. The organisation has warned
that if the negative trend in otter road mortality continues, the otter
population in the Czech Republic would be seriously threatened by
extinction.

“*Our data shows that collision with a vehicle is the most common cause
of death in the collected dead otter individuals. Probability of
collision with a car depends on traffic intensity. Otters died most
often on the 1st class roads (45.1% of individuals that died on roads),
followed by 2nd class roads (22.8%). Dead otters on roads were found in
30.4% of cases in close proximity to watercourse, in 25.5% of cases at a
dam of a reservoir (pond) and in 44.1% of cases there was no water body
or stream near the place of finding. The proportion of deaths on roads
in the period 1990–2000 was lower (57%) than in the two following
decades (80% and 78%, respectively). More, our new data show that the
numbers are still increasing*,” says Katerina Poledníková from ALKA
Wildlife. “*More importantly, improvement of the situation on the roads
does not necessarily need to be financially demanding. Very often the
adjustments of the underpasses are quite easily made and cheap – e.g.
building of wooden bench or clearing of clogged culvert.*”

The map application therefore aims especially at national Road
Authorities and Nature Conservation Authorities who are in charge of
such improvements for otter.

*The most dangerous road for otters in the Czech republic: the dam of
Nove mlyny reservoir.*  
![](/media/P5310050_610.JPG)

*Last steps. Foodprint in the mad is the last remark of otter found dead
in the vicinity.*  
![](/media/DSCN1261_610.JPG)


[1]: http://www.vydrynasilnici.cz/
