---
title: Otter abundance in the area of Dačice
image: "/media/IMG_1399_610.JPG"
published: true
date: 2016-02-04
category: news
layout: news
---
One of the actions of the Czech National Otter Management Plan is a
population surveillance and mapping. Estimation of otter abundance in
selected core areas, serves for obtaining of various information. These
are otter population density, abundance, structure and development of
the population trend in these areas. The regularly updated information
about population density will also be used as one of the source
documents for calculating damage caused by the otter.

![](/media/IMG_0393_mm.JPG){: .wysiwyg-float-left}The mapping takes
place regularly in selected core areas. Individual areas represent
various types of environments used by otters in the Czech Republic (from
lowland fishpond areas to foothill water courses) and reflect the
historic development of the range of otters in this country. In some
cases these areas overlap with SCI (Sites of Community Importance)
designated for otters as one of the key species. In these cases snow
tracking may provide information about the trend in the otter population
in the SCI concerned.

This year, area of Dačicko, which represents highland fishpond area
occupied by south Bohemian sub-population has been selected base on snow
condition and weather forecast. One square (10x10 km) representing a
typical otter habitat in the area was snow-tracked by several trackers
within a single day, counting all otter tracks from previous night.

We found tracks of 11 animals including one mother with a cub. This is
comparable to results from previous years, when we recorded 8-14 animals
and 1-3 families in average. The results confirm that highest otter
population densities are found in traditionally fishpond areas, to which
Dačice area and all Czech-Moravian Highland belong.
