---
title: Orlické hory mountains are occupied by six adult otters
image: "/media/20170119_125112_610.jpg"
published: true
date: 2017-01-26
category: news
layout: news
---
**Eurasian otter is our biggest aquatic carnivore. Good winter –
freezing temperatures and plenty of snow – enabled to organise otter
census in the area of Orlické hory. Six adult animals and two juveniles
are living in the 204 square kilometres large area. This result is
comparable to numbers from previous years, meaning that the population
is stable over years. Such abundance is, according to experts,
corresponding to carrying capacity of the area.**

“*Eurasian otter is our native carnivore. In the last century it became
almost extinct due to overhunting, regulation of watercourses and water
pollution. Since 90s the otter is returning to the Czech rivers and
streams and its population is slowly increasing. Eurasian otter is a
species protected by Czech as well as EU laws. Since 2009 the national
Otter Management Plan covers the otter-related conservation efforts. The
key part of the Management Plan is, naturally, population
surveillance*,” says Jitka Větrovcová, Otter Management Plan manager
from Nature Conservation Agency of the Czech Republic.

One of the methods frequently used in otter surveillance is snow
tracking on fresh snow. This method enables to estimate the area
occupied by otter and the abundance of animals occupying this area.
“*Otter snow tracking can be done only under specific weather
conditions. The snow must be fresh so that the tracks are only from a
single night. This enables us to track every animal’s route from the
night and thus count all animals only once. The temperatures must be
well under zero, so that the ice covers most of the rivers. Then, otter
is forced to walk on ice and snow instead of swim as usually. For this
single day we have to organise a number of otter experts, covering quite
large area simultaneously. This winter was very good in terms of weather
and enabled us to organise otter snow tracking in Orlické hory after
several unsuitable winters. The snow tracking was done in cooperation of
experts from ALKA Wildlife and Nature Conservation Agency, Protected
Landscape Area (PLA) Orlické hory Mountains and it covered the whole
area of Orlické hory*,” says Kateřina Poledníková, zoologist from
ALKA Wildlife, o.p.s

Altogether 15 experts have checked all watercourses and water reservoirs
in the area of PLA. “*We have confirmed 6 adult otters in the area, one
of them mother with two cubs, small enough to be moving still with the
mother*,” comments the results of the snow tracking Kateřina Poledníková.
Václav Pavel, zoologist from Nature Conservation Agency, PLA Orlické
hory, adds: “*Otter numbers seem to be stable over years in Orlické
hory. The snow tracking organised in 2013 revealed similar numbers –
seven adults and three cubs. Also, I regularly find otter tracks at
river Divoká Orlice, which is the otter core area in Orlické hory.*”

![](/media/IMG_7230_610.JPG)  
*Snow tracking team*

“*Otter is a territorial animal; every otter is defending quite large
territory. Otter population densities in mountainous areas range between
3-4 adult animals per 100km<sup>2</sup>. The area of PLA Orlické hory is
204 km<sup>2</sup>. Thus, otter density in Orlické hory is fully
corresponding to average densities previously proved in mountainous
trout steam habitats*,” closes Kateřina Poledníková.

*![](/media/B_l_04_610.jpg)*  
*Bělá river in Orlické hory*
